README.md, before:

# 🩺 CDSS Chest X-ray Analysis Application

![Next.js](https://img.shields.io/badge/Next.js-15.3-blue)
![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-5.0-blue)
![React](https://img.shields.io/badge/React-19.0-blue)
![Tailwind CSS](https://img.shields.io/badge/TailwindCSS-3.0-blue)
![Django](https://img.shields.io/badge/Django-4.2-green)
![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.12-green)

## [Live Demo](https://cdss-xray-app.vercel.app)

A Clinical Decision Support System (CDSS) web application that enables healthcare professionals to upload chest X-ray images and receive AI-powered diagnostic suggestions. This application bridges the gap between modern web technology (Next.js + Tailwind CSS) and advanced medical image processing capabilities, offering a seamless user experience with reliable diagnostic support.

![App Screenshot](cdss-xray-app/public/logo2.png)

## 📋 Table of Contents
- [Features](#-features)
- [Tech Stack](#-tech-stack)
- [Architecture](#-architecture)
- [Getting Started](#-getting-started)
- [Clinical Workflow](#-clinical-workflow)
- [UI & UX Highlights](#-ui--ux-highlights)
- [Backend API Documentation](#-backend-api-documentation)
- [Deployment](#-deployment)
- [Development Notes](#-development-notes)
- [License](#-license)
- [Contributing](#-contributing)
- [Author](#-author)

## 📸 Features

- **🖼️ X-ray Image Upload**: Drag and drop interface for easy chest X-ray upload
- **🤖 AI-powered Analysis**: Advanced machine learning models for accurate diagnostic suggestions
- **🔍 Heatmap Visualization**: Visual highlighting of regions of interest in X-ray images
- **📊 Detailed Results**: Comprehensive diagnostic suggestions with confidence scores
- **🔁 Rule-Based Fallback**: Intelligent fallback mechanisms when ML inference is uncertain
- **📋 Patient Vitals Integration**: Form for capturing patient temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, and symptoms
- **🏥 Enhanced Diagnosis**: Combined analysis of imaging findings with clinical parameters
- **⚕️ Treatment Recommendations**: Tailored treatment suggestions based on imaging and vitals
- **⚠️ Severity Classification**: Automatic categorization of cases as Low, Moderate, or High severity
- **🌗 Light & Dark Mode**: Toggle between themes for comfortable viewing in any environment
- **📱 Responsive Design**: Optimized user experience across all device sizes
- **🔒 User Authentication**: Secure login and registration system
- **📊 Interactive Data Visualization**: Display of prediction results using Recharts
- **♻️ Component Architecture**: Clean, modular design with reusable components
- **📄 Downloadable Reports**: Generate comprehensive diagnostic reports (coming soon)

## 🧱 Tech Stack

### 🌐 Frontend
- **Next.js 15.3**: React framework with App Router architecture
- **TypeScript**: Type-safe code development
- **React 19**: Component-based UI library
- **Tailwind CSS**: Utility-first CSS framework for styling
- **React Dropzone**: For drag-and-drop file uploads
- **Recharts**: For data visualization
- **Lucide React**: Icon library

### 🧠 AI & Backend
- **Python 3.12**: Core backend language
- **Django 4.2**: Backend web framework
- **Django REST Framework**: API development toolkit
- **PyTorch/TensorFlow**: ML model implementation
- **Pillow/OpenCV**: Image processing libraries
- **NumPy/Pandas**: Data handling
- **SQLite**: Development database (PostgreSQL in production)

## 🏗 Architecture

The application follows a modern client-server architecture with a clear separation of concerns:

```
📁 cdss-xray-app/           # Frontend application
├── app/                    # Next.js App Router pages
│   ├── layout.tsx          # Root layout with providers
│   ├── page.tsx            # Homepage
│   ├── analyze/            # X-ray upload & analysis
│   ├── result/             # Analysis results display with vitals form
│   ├── login/              # Authentication
│   └── register/           # New user registration
├── components/             # Reusable React components
│   ├── ui/                 # UI components
│   │   ├── ImageUploader.tsx
│   │   ├── HeatmapViewer.tsx
│   │   ├── PatientVitalsForm.tsx
│   │   ├── FinalDiagnosisCard.tsx
│   │   └── ...
├── hooks/                  # Custom React hooks
├── utils/                  # Helper functions
│   ├── predictionService.ts
│   └── imageUploadService.ts
├── types/                  # TypeScript type definitions
└── public/                 # Static assets

📁 backend/                 # Backend services
├── core/                   # Django project
│   ├── settings.py         # Project configuration
│   └── urls.py             # URL routing
├── auth_service/           # Authentication API
│   ├── models.py           # User model
│   ├── views.py            # Auth endpoints
│   └── ...
├── imaging_service/        # X-ray processing service
│   ├── models.py           # X-ray and diagnosis models
│   ├── views.py            # Image analysis endpoints
│   └── ...
└── requirements.txt        # Python dependencies
```

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Prerequisites
- Node.js 18.x or higher
- npm or yarn
- Python 3.8+ (for backend services)
- Git

### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/MMansy19/cdss-xray-app.git
cd cdss-xray-app
```

### 2. Frontend Setup

```bash
# Navigate to frontend directory
cd cdss-xray-app

# Install dependencies
npm install
# or
yarn install

# Run the development server
npm run dev
# or
yarn dev
```

The application will be available at [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000).

### 3. Backend Setup

```bash
# Navigate to backend directory
cd backend

# Create virtual environment
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Run database migrations
cd core
python manage.py migrate

# Start the Django development server
python manage.py runserver
```

The backend API will be available at [http://localhost:8000](http://localhost:8000).

## 🏥 Clinical Workflow

Our application follows a structured clinical workflow designed to enhance diagnostic accuracy:

### 1. Image Acquisition & Analysis
- Healthcare provider uploads a chest X-ray image
- AI model processes the image and generates initial diagnostic suggestions
- Heatmap visualization highlights regions of interest

### 2. Clinical Parameters Integration
- Provider enters patient vital signs:
  - Temperature (°C)
  - Blood Pressure (mmHg)
  - Heart Rate (bpm)
- Provider records relevant symptoms:
  - Presence of cough
  - Presence of headaches
  - Ability to smell/taste food

### 3. Enhanced Diagnosis
- System combines imaging findings with clinical parameters
- Provides refined diagnostic assessment
- Generates severity classification (Low, Moderate, High)

### 4. Treatment Recommendations
- Based on the comprehensive assessment, the system suggests:
  - Appropriate treatment approaches
  - Testing recommendations
  - Follow-up considerations

### 5. Decision Support
- All information is presented in an intuitive interface
- Provider makes final clinical judgment with AI assistance
- Full diagnostic report can be downloaded for the medical record

## 🎨 UI & UX Highlights

- **Responsive Design**: Adapts seamlessly to mobile, tablet, and desktop views
- **Theme Switching**: Elegant transition between light and dark modes
- **Intuitive Upload**: Simple drag-and-drop interface with progress indicators
- **Interactive Results**: Dynamic visualization of diagnostic findings
- **Clinical Form Design**: Professional medical input forms with validation
- **Accessibility**: WCAG-compliant design elements
- **Guided User Flow**: Clear navigation path from upload to results
- **Professional Medical Aesthetics**: Clean design focused on clinical utility

## 📡 Backend API Documentation

### Authentication Endpoints
- `POST /api/auth/register/`: Create new user account
- `POST /api/auth/login/`: Obtain authentication tokens
- `POST /api/auth/refresh/`: Refresh access token
- `POST /api/auth/logout/`: Invalidate refresh token

### Image Processing Endpoints
- `POST /api/imaging/analyze/`: Submit X-ray for initial analysis
- `POST /api/imaging/analyze-with-vitals/`: Submit X-ray with vitals for comprehensive analysis
- `GET /api/imaging/history/`: Retrieve user's analysis history

### Response Formats
```json
// Example response from /api/imaging/analyze-with-vitals/
{
  "success": true,
  "data": {
    "topPrediction": {
      "label": "Pneumonia",
      "confidence": 0.89
    },
    "predictions": [
      {"label": "Pneumonia", "confidence": 0.89},
      {"label": "COVID-19", "confidence": 0.45},
      {"label": "Normal", "confidence": 0.12}
    ],
    "heatmapUrl": "data:image/png;base64,iVBOR...",
    "severity": "Moderate",
    "diagnosisWithVitals": "Consistent with bacterial pneumonia given the presence of fever (38.5°C). Productive cough supports this diagnosis.",
    "treatmentSuggestions": [
      "Consider empiric antibiotic therapy pending culture results",
      "Antipyretics for fever management",
      "Monitor oxygen saturation"
    ]
  }
}
```

## 🚢 Deployment

### Frontend Deployment
```bash
# Build the Next.js application
npm run build
# or
yarn build

# Start the production server
npm start
# or
yarn start
```

### Backend Deployment
```bash
# Collect static files
python manage.py collectstatic

# Run with a production WSGI server
gunicorn core.wsgi:application
```

### Deployment Options
- **Vercel**: Recommended for the Next.js frontend
- **Railway/Render**: Good options for the Django backend
- **Docker**: Container-based deployment for consistent environments

## 💡 Development Notes

- **Code Organization**: Following Next.js and Django best practices with modular components
- **State Management**: Using React hooks for local state management
- **Type Safety**: Comprehensive TypeScript types for better code reliability
- **Performance Optimization**: Efficient rendering with React best practices
- **API Integration**: Clean separation between frontend and backend services
- **Security**: Proper authentication flow with refresh tokens
- **Testing**: Component and API endpoint tests (in progress)

## 📜 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

**Important**: This application is designed for educational and demonstration purposes only. All medical predictions should be reviewed by qualified healthcare professionals before clinical use.

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

1. Fork the repository
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## 👨‍⚕️ Author

**Mahmoud Mansy**  
[GitHub Profile](https://github.com/MMansy19)

---

Created with ❤️ for improving chest X-ray diagnostics

Commit message:

feat: Add demo mode configuration and refactor authentication logic
- Introduced demo mode configuration in README.md for frontend-only deployments.
- Refactored useAuth hook to support demo mode with mock user data.
- Updated predictionService to utilize mock data in demo mode for X-ray analysis.
- Enhanced backend detection logic to determine when to use demo mode based on backend availability.
- Modified types to accommodate new analysis result structure and treatment suggestions.
- Cleaned up unused code and improved error handling in various services.

README.md, after:

# 🩺 CDSS Chest X-ray Analysis Application

![Next.js](https://img.shields.io/badge/Next.js-15.3-blue)
![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-5.0-blue)
![React](https://img.shields.io/badge/React-19.0-blue)
![Tailwind CSS](https://img.shields.io/badge/TailwindCSS-3.0-blue)
![Django](https://img.shields.io/badge/Django-4.2-green)
![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.12-green)

## [Live Demo](https://cdss-xray-app.vercel.app)

A Clinical Decision Support System (CDSS) web application that enables healthcare professionals to upload chest X-ray images and receive AI-powered diagnostic suggestions. This application bridges the gap between modern web technology (Next.js + Tailwind CSS) and advanced medical image processing capabilities, offering a seamless user experience with reliable diagnostic support.

![App Screenshot](cdss-xray-app/public/logo2.png)

## 📋 Table of Contents
- [Features](#-features)
- [Tech Stack](#-tech-stack)
- [Architecture](#-architecture)
- [Getting Started](#-getting-started)
- [Clinical Workflow](#-clinical-workflow)
- [UI & UX Highlights](#-ui--ux-highlights)
- [Backend API Documentation](#-backend-api-documentation)
- [Deployment](#-deployment)
- [Development Notes](#-development-notes)
- [License](#-license)
- [Contributing](#-contributing)
- [Author](#-author)

## 📸 Features

- **🖼️ X-ray Image Upload**: Drag and drop interface for easy chest X-ray upload
- **🤖 AI-powered Analysis**: Advanced machine learning models for accurate diagnostic suggestions
- **🔍 Heatmap Visualization**: Visual highlighting of regions of interest in X-ray images
- **📊 Detailed Results**: Comprehensive diagnostic suggestions with confidence scores
- **🔁 Rule-Based Fallback**: Intelligent fallback mechanisms when ML inference is uncertain
- **📋 Patient Vitals Integration**: Form for capturing patient temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, and symptoms
- **🏥 Enhanced Diagnosis**: Combined analysis of imaging findings with clinical parameters
- **⚕️ Treatment Recommendations**: Tailored treatment suggestions based on imaging and vitals
- **⚠️ Severity Classification**: Automatic categorization of cases as Low, Moderate, or High severity
- **🌗 Light & Dark Mode**: Toggle between themes for comfortable viewing in any environment
- **📱 Responsive Design**: Optimized user experience across all device sizes
- **🔒 User Authentication**: Secure login and registration system
- **📊 Interactive Data Visualization**: Display of prediction results using Recharts
- **♻️ Component Architecture**: Clean, modular design with reusable components
- **📄 Downloadable Reports**: Generate comprehensive diagnostic reports (coming soon)

## 🧱 Tech Stack

### 🌐 Frontend
- **Next.js 15.3**: React framework with App Router architecture
- **TypeScript**: Type-safe code development
- **React 19**: Component-based UI library
- **Tailwind CSS**: Utility-first CSS framework for styling
- **React Dropzone**: For drag-and-drop file uploads
- **Recharts**: For data visualization
- **Lucide React**: Icon library

### 🧠 AI & Backend
- **Python 3.12**: Core backend language
- **Django 4.2**: Backend web framework
- **Django REST Framework**: API development toolkit
- **PyTorch/TensorFlow**: ML model implementation
- **Pillow/OpenCV**: Image processing libraries
- **NumPy/Pandas**: Data handling
- **SQLite**: Development database (PostgreSQL in production)

## 🏗 Architecture

The application follows a modern client-server architecture with a clear separation of concerns:

```
📁 cdss-xray-app/           # Frontend application
├── app/                    # Next.js App Router pages
│   ├── layout.tsx          # Root layout with providers
│   ├── page.tsx            # Homepage
│   ├── analyze/            # X-ray upload & analysis
│   ├── result/             # Analysis results display with vitals form
│   ├── login/              # Authentication
│   └── register/           # New user registration
├── components/             # Reusable React components
│   ├── ui/                 # UI components
│   │   ├── ImageUploader.tsx
│   │   ├── HeatmapViewer.tsx
│   │   ├── PatientVitalsForm.tsx
│   │   ├── FinalDiagnosisCard.tsx
│   │   └── ...
├── hooks/                  # Custom React hooks
├── utils/                  # Helper functions
│   ├── predictionService.ts
│   └── imageUploadService.ts
├── types/                  # TypeScript type definitions
└── public/                 # Static assets

📁 backend/                 # Backend services
├── core/                   # Django project
│   ├── settings.py         # Project configuration
│   └── urls.py             # URL routing
├── auth_service/           # Authentication API
│   ├── models.py           # User model
│   ├── views.py            # Auth endpoints
│   └── ...
├── imaging_service/        # X-ray processing service
│   ├── models.py           # X-ray and diagnosis models
│   ├── views.py            # Image analysis endpoints
│   └── ...
└── requirements.txt        # Python dependencies
```

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Prerequisites
- Node.js 18.x or higher
- npm or yarn
- Python 3.8+ (for backend services)
- Git

### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/MMansy19/cdss-xray-app.git
cd cdss-xray-app
```

### 2. Frontend Setup

```bash
# Navigate to frontend directory
cd cdss-xray-app

# Install dependencies
npm install
# or
yarn install

# Run the development server
npm run dev
# or
yarn dev
```

The application will be available at [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000).

### 3. Backend Setup

```bash
# Navigate to backend directory
cd backend

# Create virtual environment
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Run database migrations
cd core
python manage.py migrate

# Start the Django development server
python manage.py runserver
```

The backend API will be available at [http://localhost:8000](http://localhost:8000).

### 4. Demo Mode Configuration

The application can run in "demo mode" without a backend:

- Set `NEXT_PUBLIC_DEMO_MODE=true` in your environment variables
- This enables mock services for X-ray analysis and authentication
- Perfect for frontend-only deployments on platforms like Vercel

For Vercel deployment:
1. Connect your GitHub repository
2. Deploy the `cdss-xray-app` directory as the project root
3. Add environment variable `NEXT_PUBLIC_DEMO_MODE=true`
4. No additional configuration needed - mock data will be used

## 🏥 Clinical Workflow

Our application follows a structured clinical workflow designed to enhance diagnostic accuracy:

### 1. Image Acquisition & Analysis
- Healthcare provider uploads a chest X-ray image
- AI model processes the image and generates initial diagnostic suggestions
- Heatmap visualization highlights regions of interest

### 2. Clinical Parameters Integration
- Provider enters patient vital signs:
  - Temperature (°C)
  - Blood Pressure (mmHg)
  - Heart Rate (bpm)
- Provider records relevant symptoms:
  - Presence of cough
  - Presence of headaches
  - Ability to smell/taste food

### 3. Enhanced Diagnosis
- System combines imaging findings with clinical parameters
- Provides refined diagnostic assessment
- Generates severity classification (Low, Moderate, High)

### 4. Treatment Recommendations
- Based on the comprehensive assessment, the system suggests:
  - Appropriate treatment approaches
  - Testing recommendations
  - Follow-up considerations

### 5. Decision Support
- All information is presented in an intuitive interface
- Provider makes final clinical judgment with AI assistance
- Full diagnostic report can be downloaded for the medical record

## 🎨 UI & UX Highlights

- **Responsive Design**: Adapts seamlessly to mobile, tablet, and desktop views
- **Theme Switching**: Elegant transition between light and dark modes
- **Intuitive Upload**: Simple drag-and-drop interface with progress indicators
- **Interactive Results**: Dynamic visualization of diagnostic findings
- **Clinical Form Design**: Professional medical input forms with validation
- **Accessibility**: WCAG-compliant design elements
- **Guided User Flow**: Clear navigation path from upload to results
- **Professional Medical Aesthetics**: Clean design focused on clinical utility

## 📡 Backend API Documentation

### Authentication Endpoints
- `POST /api/auth/register/`: Create new user account
- `POST /api/auth/login/`: Obtain authentication tokens
- `POST /api/auth/refresh/`: Refresh access token
- `POST /api/auth/logout/`: Invalidate refresh token

### Image Processing Endpoints
- `POST /api/imaging/analyze/`: Submit X-ray for initial analysis
- `POST /api/imaging/analyze-with-vitals/`: Submit X-ray with vitals for comprehensive analysis
- `GET /api/imaging/history/`: Retrieve user's analysis history

### Response Formats
```json
// Example response from /api/imaging/analyze-with-vitals/
{
  "success": true,
  "data": {
    "topPrediction": {
      "label": "Pneumonia",
      "confidence": 0.89
    },
    "predictions": [
      {"label": "Pneumonia", "confidence": 0.89},
      {"label": "COVID-19", "confidence": 0.45},
      {"label": "Normal", "confidence": 0.12}
    ],
    "heatmapUrl": "data:image/png;base64,iVBOR...",
    "severity": "Moderate",
    "diagnosisWithVitals": "Consistent with bacterial pneumonia given the presence of fever (38.5°C). Productive cough supports this diagnosis.",
    "treatmentSuggestions": [
      "Consider empiric antibiotic therapy pending culture results",
      "Antipyretics for fever management",
      "Monitor oxygen saturation"
    ]
  }
}
```

## 🚢 Deployment

### Frontend Deployment
```bash
# Build the Next.js application
npm run build
# or
yarn build

# Start the production server
npm start
# or
yarn start
```

### Backend Deployment
```bash
# Collect static files
python manage.py collectstatic

# Run with a production WSGI server
gunicorn core.wsgi:application
```

### Deployment Options
- **Vercel**: Recommended for the Next.js frontend
- **Railway/Render**: Good options for the Django backend
- **Docker**: Container-based deployment for consistent environments

## 💡 Development Notes

- **Code Organization**: Following Next.js and Django best practices with modular components
- **State Management**: Using React hooks for local state management
- **Type Safety**: Comprehensive TypeScript types for better code reliability
- **Performance Optimization**: Efficient rendering with React best practices
- **API Integration**: Clean separation between frontend and backend services
- **Security**: Proper authentication flow with refresh tokens
- **Testing**: Component and API endpoint tests (in progress)

## 📜 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

**Important**: This application is designed for educational and demonstration purposes only. All medical predictions should be reviewed by qualified healthcare professionals before clinical use.

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

1. Fork the repository
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## 👨‍⚕️ Author

**Mahmoud Mansy**  
[GitHub Profile](https://github.com/MMansy19)

---

Created with ❤️ for improving chest X-ray diagnostics
